CITY OF MAPLEWOOD MUNICIPAL CODE
Title 12: Property Standards and Land Use
Chapter 12.04: Fences, Walls, and Hedges

Section 12.04.010 - Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the construction, height, and maintenance of fences, walls, and hedges to ensure neighborhood safety, aesthetics, and property value preservation.

Section 12.04.020 - Definitions
(a) "Fence" means any structure made of wood, metal, vinyl, or composite materials used to enclose, divide, or screen an area.
(b) "Front yard" means the area between the front property line and the front building line.
(c) "Rear yard" means the area between the rear property line and the rear building line.
(d) "Side yard" means the area between a side property line and the building.

Section 12.04.030 - Height Restrictions
(a) Front yard fences shall not exceed four (4) feet in height.
(b) Rear yard and side yard fences may be up to six (6) feet in height.
(c) Corner lots: Fences within 15 feet of street intersections shall not exceed three (3) feet to maintain sight visibility.
(d) Exceptions: Fences may exceed the height limits by up to two (2) feet if the additional height consists of open lattice work with at least 50% open area.

Section 12.04.040 - Materials
(a) Permitted materials include wood, vinyl, wrought iron, chain link, and masonry.
(b) Prohibited materials: barbed wire, razor wire, and electrified fencing in residential zones.
(c) All materials must be weather-resistant and maintained in good condition.

Section 12.04.050 - Setback Requirements
(a) Fences may be constructed up to the property line.
(b) Fences on corner lots must maintain a 3-foot setback from sidewalks.
(c) No fence shall obstruct drainage easements or utility access.

Section 12.04.060 - Permit Requirements
(a) A building permit is required for fences over four (4) feet in height.
(b) Permit applications must include a site plan showing fence location and height.
(c) Permit fee: $75 for standard fence permits.

Section 12.04.070 - Maintenance
(a) All fences must be maintained in a structurally sound condition.
(b) Damaged or deteriorating fences must be repaired within 30 days of notice.
(c) The finished side of the fence shall face outward toward neighboring properties.

Section 12.04.080 - Enforcement
Violations of this chapter are subject to fines of up to $500 per day until compliance is achieved.
